los angeles transplant seeking new york boyfriend just as the title suggests i am a west coast transplant female .  i'm not a traditional southern california girl with beach blonde hair and fake tits .  but i do appreciate a nice beach front summer house and fresh guacamole .  with fall just around the corner and my first year in new york coming to a close .  i am in search of a local new york boyfriend someone who would enjoy a quick trip apple picking .  as well as wine night at home while enjoying some of my best home cooking yes .  i cook .  clean .  and would love to help around the house .  yes .  i am totally open to moving in with you .  because if there is one thing i've learned about this city is that if you want to make a relationship last .  then move in with your partner as quickly as possible .  my lease is up end of october and there is no time like the present .  being a transplant .  most of my friends are work related .  and i would really like to expand myself into your circle .  i am 420friendly la girl duh and would love to be your friends' girlfriends' new bestie we can have an athome arts and crafts or just go shopping while you guys watch football .  don't worry .  we don't need to spend our time indoors cuddling .  i am a fan of bars and clubs if we have to .  but beware .  heels .  snow .  and myself got into a few altercations last year .  so i might be slow on the club scene .  love bars .  pickle back expert .  and i haven't met a dingy dive bar i didn't fall for especially ones with games such as .  but not limited to .  shuffleboard and buck hunter .    don't like all of these things .  don't fit every criteria .  that's fine .  i am flexible .  and my job that keeps me busy .  did i mention i travel a lot so we won't get sick of each other .  yeah thats a major plus for both of us .  please send all serious inquiries .  if you include a photo group photos are ok just let me know which guy you are or instagram handle .  i will be contacting you soon .  as the weather is getting increasingly colder .   8203thanks .    v8203
